.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2018 Peter Selinger.
.\" This file is part of ccrypt. It is free software and it is covered
.\" by the GNU general public license. See the file COPYING for details.
.TH CCGUESS 1 "July 2018" "Version 1.11" "Encryption"
.SH NAME
ccguess \- search for ccrypt encryption keys
.SH SYNOPSIS

.nf
.B ccguess [\fIoptions\fP] \fIfile\fP...
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION

The \fBccguess\fP program attempts to guess \fBccrypt\fP(1) encryption
keys by searching the relevant part of the key space. This is done by
prompting the user for an \fIapproximate key\fP and then trying many
variations of this key. This is intended to assist \fBccrypt\fP users
in recovering mistyped or forgotten keys, provided that they remember
at least part of the key.

Note that \fBccrypt\fP provides strong cryptographic security: there
are no special back doors or shortcuts to recovering forgotten
keys. Therefore, the \fBccguess\fP program does not have any special
powers. It simply works by trying different keys until a possible
match is found.

A search of the entire key space is not usually a practical option.
\fBccguess\fP therefore works by prompting the user for an approximate
key. It then tries all variations that can be obtained by applying a
small number of changes. Here, each change is either a deletion of one
letter, an insertion of one letter, a replacement of one letter by
another, or a transposition of two adjacent letters. By default,
\fBccguess\fP searches all keys that differ from the approximate key
by up to 5 changes. The number of changes searched can be adjusted
with the \fB--depth\fP option.

The mechanism by which \fBccguess\fP determines whether a key is a
"possible match" is the same as that used by \fBccrypt\fP to reject
non-matching decryption keys. There is a small chance of a false
match, i.e., \fBccguess\fP may find a key that turns out not to be the
true encryption key and does not decrypt the file correctly. A false
match happens approximately once for every 4.3 billion keywords tried,
so the longer your search goes on, the higher the likelihood that a
false match is found. Normally, \fBccguess\fP stops after the first
possible match is found, but the \fB-c\fP option can be used to search
for additional keys. The possibility of a false match can be
further reduced by supplying multiple files that have been encrypted
with the same key. In this case, \fBccguess\fP will search for keys
that match \fIany\fP of the files, but will print a warning for keys
that do not match \fIall\fP of the files.
.SH OPTIONS

The following options are supported:
.TP 10
.B -h, --help
Help. Print usage information and exit.
.TP
.B -L, --license
Print license info and exit.
.TP
.B -V, --version
Print version info and exit.
.TP
.B -K \fIkey\fP, --key \fIkey\fP
Specify the approximate key on the command line, rather than prompting
the user for it.
.TP
.B -d \fIn\fP, --depth \fIn\fP
Search keys that contain up to \fIn\fP changes. The default is 5.
.TP
.B -c, --continue
Keep trying more keys even after the first match is found. By default,
\fBccguess\fP will stop after the first key is found that matches all
input files.
.TP
.B -t \fIchars\fP, --chartable \fIchars\fP
Specify the list of characters to try for replacements and
insertions. By default, \fBccguess\fP will try all printable ASCII
characters. If you know, for example, that your key only used
lowercase letters and numbers, you can speed up the search by
specifying a list of characters explicitly. This option is mutually
exclusive with \fB-n\fP.
.TP
.B -n, --non-printable
Allow non-printable characters in keys. By default, \fBccguess\fP will
only try printable ASCII characters. Note that the use of this option
slows down the search significantly. This option is mutually exclusive
with \fB-t\fP.
.PD
.SH ARGUMENTS

.TP 10
.I file
The name of a file that has been encrypted with the unknown key. This
file is only read from, not written to. The special filename "-" is
used to denote standard input.

If multiple files are specified, \fBccguess\fP will search for keys
that match \fIany\fP of the files, but will print a warning for keys
that do not match \fIall\fP of the files.
.PD
.SH EXAMPLE

Suppose the file \fImyfile.cpt\fP has been encrypted with the key
"gardenhouse", but the user remembers "gardenhose". The command
.nf

   ccguess -K gardenhose myfile.cpt

.fi
will find the correct key after 2318 guesses. 
.SH EXIT STATUS

The exit status is 0 if at least one possible match is found, 1 if no
matches are found, and >=2 if an error occurred.
.SH VERSION

1.11
.SH AUTHOR

Peter Selinger <selinger at users.sourceforge.net>
.SH COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2000-2018 Peter Selinger

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, 
Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA.
See also http://www.gnu.org/.
